---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

My name is Antonella and I am an internationally active scientist. I studied Physics in my hometown Pavia, Italy, a beautiful city with a fascinating history and a long academic tradition. The University of Pavia (*Alma Ticinensis Universitas*) was funded in 1361, and Pavia is home to a fairly unique network of Colleges - in this sense, the only other Italian University to compare with is Pisa. I was myself alumn of Collegio Ghislieri, funded in 1567 by Pope Pius V, and being a *Ghislieriana* triggered the set of events that brought me where I am today.

Indeed, my scientific *vita* is far from linear. During my last year of highschool I was actually considering to study art at the Accademia di Brera in Milan! Somehow, I instead opted for the Bioengineering curriculum, thinking that science as a hobby is less trivial than art. There is where the College environment was instrumental for me to understand my real academic interests. Half-way through the first year, I got extremely frustrated at how little insights we were given on fundamental subjects like Analysis, Geometry and Basic Physics. This had nothing to do with the teachers - the Professor for Analysis I and II was a renowed Applied Mathematician, whose colorful way of teaching is what made me understand I wanted more than what the Engineering curriculum offered.

Talking with College mates, I realized I was in the wrong place: the Physics department is where all the cool stuff was explained and demonstrated. I engaged then in my first transition, made challenging by the fact that, if I wanted to keep my Alumn status in Ghislieri, I needed to pass all my exams by the end of the academic year and with above average grades. In summer 2005 I finished my first year in Engineering, registered to the second year of Physics and started studying for the extra exams I needed to pass to fulfill the Physics 1st year curriculum. I was lucky to be able to count on the support of my fellow College mates to slowly fill my knowledge gaps and get right on track with the more demanding classes.

Funny enough, I went to Physics 100% sure I wanted to study Biomedical Physics. After the first half of my third year I changed my mind and wanted to study Matter Physics, but when I had to choose the topic for my Bachelor Thesis, Particle Physics came out as the absolute winner. It was 2007, and the Large Hadron Collider in Geneva was about to start smashing protons at unprecedent energies... how could I resist the call? Hence I chose the Nuclear and Subnuclear Physics Curriculum for my Master, and I will never regret it. In 2009, for my Master Thesis project, I got a scholarship from Collegio Ghislieri to spend five months at the University of Geneva (Switzerland) and at CERN, Centre Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire, where under the joint supervision of Dr. Giacomo Polesello (Pavia) and Prof. Allan Clark (Geneva) I first joined the ATLAS Collaboration and performed an analysis of Monte Carlo simulated proton-proton collision data aimed at discovering signals from supersymmetric particles.

Success is a mixture of talent and luck, and if I think about how lucky I was I start getting doubts about my talent at all. The LHC started beam collisions in 2008, but had to stop soon enough for a small incident. It restarted again at the end of 2009, which is basically when I got my Master degree and started looking around for PhDs. I was freshly into my PhD when on March 30th 2010 the LHC recorded the first collisions at 7 TeV. I remember a full CERN Main Auditorium where I got goose bumps realizing that sitting around me there where scientists that spent the last 30 years actually building that thing, while I was there completely out of luck of being at the right place at the right time. I would have had all those beautiful data to play with for the next 3 and something years, with no other merit than being born in 1985.

I actually had not considered a PhD at all before going to CERN. Once I was there I could interact with amazing scientists (first of all my supervisor Giacomo) and I soon realized I wanted more of that feeling when you google something and the solution is not there, you have to work it out because hey, nobody knows, and you are in charge for finding the solution and advancing knowledge. Thanks to connections I made in Geneva, I learned of a PhD opportunity at the Institut de Física d’Altes Energies (IFAE), Barcelona, Spain, and after my supervisor highly praised the IFAE group as one of the best in the ATLAS Collaboration, I had little doubts about where I wanted to go. Yes, the beauty of Barcelona also had some influence on the choice, but at the time I was so nerdly in love with CERN that I had no objections when I was told I would be based in Geneva. 

So there it *really* started, February 2010, and for the next 4 years I would work as if in a completely different universe, where personal life and work are impossible to discern because you love what you are doing, and you even feel weird thinking that someone is actually paying you to do something you would do anyway. This is (maybe) something common to many in academia, I still feel like the eternal student and the more I learn, the more I feel compelled to learn more. And someone (thank you tax-payers) is actually *paying me* to learn. This is also when I started feeling profoundly indebted with society, and while at CERN it was easy to just contribute to the extensive program for outreach and knowledge transfer, today I do my best to take the initiative and organize outreach events or workshops for young(er) scientists.

In my doctoral research I developed a data analysis strategy to discover signals from particles not included in our current understanding of fundamental particles interactions, the Standard Model. There are indeed many alternative theories proposing extensions of the Standard Model and predicting new particles (``exotic physics''); my analysis allowed to test many of these theories at the same time thanks to the choice of model-independent observables. This was a key achievement in a general-purpose experiment like ATLAS, where the vast amount of explorable ``new physics'' channels makes it impractical to focus on a single signal. I also contributed to the overall physics program of the ATLAS collaborations with detector calibration studies of the hadronic calorimeter, a critical element for all ATLAS results, including the discovery of the Higgs boson that led to the award of the Nobel Prize in Physics to François Englert and Peter Higgs in 2013. Yes, my name is on that paper, lost within the list of 3000 something authors, but it is there!



